Add BERTIN blog post (#166)
huggingface/blog: bertin.md

        <div class="bfc">
            <code>Pablogps</code>
            <span class="fullname">Pablo González de Prado</span>
        </div>
    </a>
</div>

<div class="author-card">
    <a href="/mrm8488">
        <img class="avatar avatar-user" src="https://aeiljuispo.cloudimg.io/v7/https://s3.amazonaws.com/moonup/production/uploads/1622844686495-5e4318d616b09a31220980d6.jpeg?w=200&h=200&f=face" title="Gravatar">
        <div class="bfc">
            <code>mrm8488</code>
            <span class="fullname">Manuel Romero</span>
        </div>
    </a>
</div>

<div class="author-card">
    <a href="/mariagrandury">
        <img class="avatar avatar-user" src="https://aeiljuispo.cloudimg.io/v7/https://s3.amazonaws.com/moonup/production/uploads/1625139502147-5f9c00a5777efc07d7f1e4be.png?w=200&h=200&f=face" title="Gravatar">
        <div class="bfc">
            <code>mariagrandury</code>
            <span class="fullname">María Grandury</span>
        </div>
    </a>
</div>

## BERTIN

> BERTIN is a series of Spanish RoBERTa models trained during the [JAX/Flax Community Event](https://discuss.huggingface.co/t/open-to-the-community-community-week-using-jax-flax-for-nlp-cv/7104), organized by [HuggingFace](https://huggingface.co) and sponsored by [Google Cloud](https://cloud.google.com/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BERTIN is a series of Spanish RoBERTa models trained during the [JAX/Flax Community Event](https://discuss.huggingface.co/t/open-to-the-community-community-week-using-jax-flax-for-nlp-cv/7104), organized by [HuggingFace](https://huggingface.co). The [Google Cloud](https://cloud.google.com/) provided free Tensor Processing Units (TPUs) during the event, enabling participants to tackle interesting challenges in the areas of Natural Language Processing and Computer Vision.
```

Author: Thank you! I added your suggestion but without the initial `The` in `The [Google Cloud](https://cloud.google.com/) provided ...`

> The BERTIN project was born from a group of strangers with a shared interest in Spanish NLP, who decided to organize and participate in the JAX/Flax Community Event with the main goal of training a competitive monolingual RoBERTa language model in Spanish.

Reviewer: nit: please add new lines

```suggestion
The BERTIN project was born from a group of strangers with a shared interest in Spanish NLP, who decided to organize and participate in the JAX/Flax Community Event with the main goal of training a competitive monolingual RoBERTa language model in Spanish.

```

> The majority of our team members were part of the [NL en ES](https://nlp-en-es.org) community and our team members are based in Spain, Germany and the United States.

Reviewer: I would also add one sentence about what NLP en es is

```suggestion
The majority of our team members were part of the [NLP en ES](https://nlp-en-es.org) community and our team members are based in Spain, Germany and the United States.

```

> Through the initial phase of the project, through team discussions around the project strategy, it became clear that training a large language model within the time frame of the even was hardly feasible, which lead to the exploration of different ideas around data sampling to improve training efficiency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Through the initial phase of the project, through team discussions around the project strategy, it became clear that training a large language model within the time frame of the even was hardly feasible, which lead to the exploration of different ideas around data sampling to improve training efficiency.

```

> Through the initial phase of the project, through team discussions around the project strategy, it became clear that training a large language model within the time frame of the even was hardly feasible, which lead to the exploration of different ideas around data sampling to improve training efficiency.

Author: thanks @stevhliu ! that definitely reads a lot better :)

Each BERTIN model was trained in under a week on a Google Cloud TPUv3-8 using publicly available data. Our results show state-of-the-art performance in multiple downstream tasks, and overall figures are comparable to models trained on supercomputers using large private datasets.

> Training a competitive large language model within the time frame of the event proved to be a challenging task since the early stage of the project. For this reason, we explored several perplexity-based sampling strategies that allowed us to train models efficiently under limited compute and time resources. We are very excited to introduce our methodology and learnings with the hope to empower small teams to train competitive language models on a budget.

Reviewer: I would add a link to perplexity-based sampling strategies to a useful resource to read about it

Author: @osanseviero we could link to [this paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1911.00359.pdf), which is where we got the idea from, but we already link it further down in the perplexity sampling section.
Or we could add a link to [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perplexity) maybe?
Let me know what you think

## Motivation

> According to [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_languages_by_total_number_of_speakers), Spanish is the second most-spoken language in the world by native speakers, with over 470 million speakers. However, most NLP research is mainly focused in English. Due to this, relevant contributions like BERT, XLNet or GPT-2 sometimes take years to be available in Spanish and, when they do, it is often via multilingual versions which are not as performant as the English alternative.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
According to [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_languages_by_total_number_of_speakers), Spanish is the second most-spoken language in the world by native speakers, with over 470 million speakers. However, most NLP research is mainly focused in English. Due to this, relevant contributions like BERT, XLNet and GPT-2 can take years to be available in Spanish and, when they do, it is often via multilingual versions which are not as performant as the English alternative.
```

Monolingual Spanish models are hard to come by and often trained on proprietary datasets and using massive compute resources. In practice, this means that training competitive language models remain exclusive to a handful of large technology companies and organizations. In addition to the prohibitive financial cost, training large language models has a significant [environmental cost](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1906.02243.pdf) (Strubell et al., 2019). One of our motivations consisted on bringing the training process of large models like RoBERTa one step closer to smaller groups. To this end, we explored techniques that make training these architectures more data-efficient, easier and faster, thus contributing to the democratization of large language models.

> At the time of the event, there were no monolingual RoBERTa models available in Spanish. Therefore, releasing one such model was the primary goal of our project. During the JAX/Flax Community Event we released a beta version of our model, which was the first such monolingual model in Spanish. Shortly after, the Barcelona Supercomputing Center released their own [RoBERTa](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2107.07253.pdf) model. The precise timing suggests our work precipitated its publication, and such an increase in competition is a valuable outcome of our project. We are grateful for the Barcelona Supercomputing Center efforts to include BERTIN results in their paper.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the time of the event, there were no monolingual RoBERTa models available in Spanish. Therefore, releasing one such model was the primary goal of our project. During the JAX/Flax Community Event we released a beta version of our model, which was the first such monolingual model in Spanish. Shortly after, the Barcelona Supercomputing Center released their own [RoBERTa](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2107.07253.pdf) model. The precise timing suggests our work precipitated its publication, and such an increase in competition is a valuable side outcome of our project. We are grateful for the Barcelona Supercomputing Center efforts to include BERTIN results in their paper.
```

## The dataset: Spanish mC4

> In order to train BERTIN, we used the Spanish subset of the open-sourced [mC4 dataset](https://aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.41/). mC4 is a multilingual variant of [C4 aka Colossal Clean Crawled Corpus](https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.10683), a cleaned version of Common Crawl's web crawl corpus. While C4 was used to train the T5 text-to-text Transformer models, mC4 comprises natural text in 101 languages drawn from the public Common Crawl web-scrape and was used to train mT5, the multilingual version of T5.

Reviewer: I wonder if https://huggingface.co/datasets/mc4 should be linked somewhere in here

<figure>

![Perplexity distributions by percentage CCNet corpus](./assets/31_bertin/ccnet.png)

<caption>Figure 1. Perplexity distributions by percentage CCNet corpus. The blue 
line (en), with a narrower peak, corresponds to English language, while the red 
one (gu) corresponds to Gujarati. From (Wenzek et al., 2020)</caption>
</figure>

With this information in mind, we decided to use perplexity values to filter high-quality
documents while sampling a very large dataset. The goal is to be able to train 
competitive models using less—but higher quality—data, with reduced computational
 times.

## Methodology

In order to test our hypothesis, we first calculated the perplexity of each document in a random subset (roughly a quarter of the data) of mC4-es and extracted their distribution and quartiles (see Figure 2).

<figure>

![Perplexity distributions and quartiles (red lines) of 44M samples of mC4-es](./assets/31_bertin/perp-p95.png)

<caption>Figure 2. Perplexity distributions and quartiles (red lines) of 44M samples of mC4-es.</caption>
</figure>

> With the extracted perplexity percentiles, we created two functions to oversample the central quartiles with the idea of biasing against samples with perplexity either too low, which could indicate the sentences are short, repetitive pieces of very common text; or too high, which could potentially indicate poor quality text containing incorrect language forms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the extracted perplexity percentiles, we created two functions to oversample the central quartiles with the idea of biasing against samples with:

* very low perplexity, which could indicate the sentences are short,
repetitive pieces of very common text.
* very high perplexity, which could indicate poor quality text containing incorrect language forms.
```

> The first function is a `Stepwise` that simply oversamples the central quartiles using quartile boundaries and a `factor` for the desired sampling frequency for each quartile, obviously giving larger frequencies for middle quartiles, oversampling Q2 and Q3 and subsampling Q1 and Q4 (see Figure 3).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first function is a `Stepwise` that simply oversamples the central quartiles using quartile boundaries and a `factor` for the desired sampling frequency for each quartile, obviously giving larger frequencies for middle quartiles, oversampling Q2 and Q3 and subsampling Q1 and Q4 (see Figure 3).

```

The second function weighted the perplexity distribution by a Gaussian-like function, to smooth out the sharp boundaries of the `Stepwise` function and give a better approximation to the desired underlying distribution (see Figure 4).

> We adjusted the `factor` parameter of the `Stepwise` function, and the `factor` and `width` parameters of the `Gaussian` function to roughly be able to sample 50M samples from the 416M in mC4-es (see Figure 4). For comparison, we randomly sampled mC4-es up to 50M samples as well. In terms of sizes, we went down from 1TB of data to ~200GB. We released the code to sample from mC4 on the fly when streaming for any language as part of the dataset [`bertin-project/mc4-sampling`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/bertin-project/mc4-sampling) (obviously the parameters for the sampling functions will need to be adapted to the statistics of the language used).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We adjusted the `factor` parameter of the `Stepwise` function, and the `factor` and `width` parameters of the `Gaussian` function to be able to roughly sample 50M samples from the 416M in mC4-es (see Figure 4). For comparison, we randomly sampled mC4-es up to 50M samples as well. In terms of sizes, we went down from 1TB of data to ~200GB. We released the code to sample from mC4 on the fly when streaming for any language as part of the dataset [`bertin-project/mc4-sampling`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/bertin-project/mc4-sampling) (obviously the parameters for the sampling functions will need to be adapted to the statistics of the language used).
```

```python
from datasets import load_dataset

for config in ("random", "stepwise", "gaussian"):
    mc4es = load_dataset(
        "bertin-project/mc4-es-sampled",
        config,
        split="train",
        streaming=True
    ).shuffle(buffer_size=1000)
    for sample in mc4es:
        print(config, sample)
        break
```

<figure>

![Experimental perplexity distributions of the sampled mc4-es after applying Gaussian and Stepwise functions, and the Random control sample](./assets/31_bertin/datasets-perp.png)

<caption>Figure 5. Experimental perplexity distributions of the sampled mc4-es after applying Gaussian and Stepwise functions, and the Random control sample.</caption>
</figure>

`Random` sampling displayed the same perplexity distribution of the underlying true distribution, as can be seen in Figure 6.

<figure>

![Experimental perplexity distribution of the sampled mc4-es after applying Random sampling](./assets/31_bertin/datasets-random-comparison.png)

<caption>Figure 6. Experimental perplexity distribution of the sampled mc4-es after applying Random sampling.</caption>
</figure>

> In order to rule out the possibility of perplexity sampling filtering out relevant subsets of the dataset, such as documents relating to certain topics, we visually explored potential correlations between semantics and perplexity. The interactive visualization was generated using [a distilled version of multilingual USE](https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/distiluse-base-multilingual-cased-v1) to embed a random subset of 20,000 mC4-es examples, then t-SNE was used for dimensionality reduction to a 2D space. The visualization showed a seemingly uniform distribution of perplexity across the different semantic clusters (each example is colored based on its perplexity). This is important since, in principle, perplexity sampling could introduce undesired biases if perplexity happens to be correlated to some other quality of our data. The visualization can be found [here](https://huggingface.co/bertin-project/bertin-roberta-base-spanish/raw/main/images/perplexity_colored_embeddings.html).

Reviewer: FYI we could have the embedding in a Space if you want. You can use static files if you don't want to use streamlit/gradio

Author: thanks Omar, I'll give it a go! I tried embedding it in the markdown without much success 😢  but a Space sounds like a good alternative

|   mBERT      |  0.9630 / 0.9689     | 0.8616 / 0.9790     |  0.8895*     |  0.7606    |
|  BETO        |  0.9639 / 0.9693     | 0.8596 / 0.9790     |  0.8720*     | **0.8012** |
|   BSC-BNE    |  **0.9655 / 0.9706** | 0.8764 / 0.9818     |  0.8815*     |  0.7771*   |
|    Beta      |  0.9616 / 0.9669     | 0.8640 / 0.9799     |  0.8670*     |  0.7751*   |
|    Random    |  0.9651 / 0.9700     | 0.8638 / 0.9802     |  0.8800*     |  0.7795    |
|  Stepwise    |  0.9647 / 0.9698     | 0.8749 / 0.9819     |  0.8685*     |  0.7763    |
|   Gaussian   |  0.9644 / 0.9692     | **0.8779 / 0.9820** |  0.8875*     |  0.7843    |
| Random-512   |  0.9636 /  0.9690    | 0.8664 / 0.9806     |  0.6735*     |  0.7799    |
| Stepwise-512 |  0.9633 / 0.9684     | 0.8662 / 0.9811     |  0.8690      |  0.7695    |
| Gaussian-512 |  0.9646 / 0.9697     | 0.8707 / 0.9810     | **0.8965**\* |  0.7843    |

</figure>

In addition to the tasks above, we also fine-tuned the [`beta`](https://huggingface.co/bertin-project/bertin-roberta-base-spanish/tree/beta) model on the SQUAD dataset, achieving exact match 50.96 and F1 68.74 (sequence length 128).

> During fine-tuning we observed poor performance on certain tasks for some models, so we re-trained these several times (marked with * on the table) to account for variability across runs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During fine-tuning we observed poor performance on certain tasks for some models, so we re-trained these several times (marked with * on the table) to account for variability across runs.

```
